# TF-Parameterization -- Bachelorproject
Using three optimization algorithms to dertermine optimal parameters for mRNA foldchange predictions and identification of TF impact.

## Abstract
All known lifeforms are subject to an internal regulation process dictating their decision making. Thereby the information centre of the organism, often the DNA, is part of a complex net of kinetic and thermodynamic interactions between biomolecules. Many attempts have been and will be made to map this network of relations. Understanding such processes yields targeted actions against any pathological behaviour, be it by endogenous or exogenous cells. Such targeted therapies for diseases have proven to be successful in treating highly specific cases like cancer. Though the progress is stagnant, especially for critical cancers like triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) which provide difficult challenges, recent publications suggest transcription factors (TF) as viable targets for personalised medication. Streamlining the quantification of interconnected transcription regulators as part of a network, i.e. the transcription contained portion of any gene regulatory network (GRN), has yet to be done. This work focuses on a first step of such a process, incorporating optimization algorithms as means to determine TF impact. By letting three common optimization algorithms imitate the fold change of a small test network the general approach of the non-linear model equation and utilization of optimization algorithms to quantify parameter values for transcription regulatory networks is assessed. Simultaneously the subsequent workflow will provide a basis for further investigation of this strategy.

## General Algorithm-Outline
In the following the three algorithms used in this project will be briefly sumarized, though it is recommended to at least read through the theoretical_background file. 
### SLSQP - Sequential Least Squares Programming
The quasi-newtonian method SLSQP is a modified Sequential Quadratic Programming algorithm. It transrforms the given Non-Linear Problem (NLP) into a Linear Least Squares (LLS) subproblem. This then is used to claculate the step size. The search direction for the linesearch algorithm is infered from the B-Matrix. This matrix is an approximation of the Hesse-Matrix constructed based on the Lagrange-function of the subproblem. Using a Housholder transformer the inverse of the Hesse-Matrix or its approximation (B) is updated, which provide the direction for the next best step. Solutions that violate the constraints should not be proprossed.
### NSGAII - Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II
This heuristic algorithm sorts the proposed solutions by their dominance, meaning those that give the best result are preferred, but violating the constraints does not concluded in being automatically excluded from the selection and crossover. Proposed solutions can lie outside the search space.
### DE - Differential Evolution
The second heuristic algorithm uses the best proposed solutions and combines them into the next generation. Just as the other genetic/evolutionary algorithm, DE does not prioritize all constraints and sometimes lies outside the search space.
